feat: rfc for burning (#10)
tari-project/rfcs: src/RFC-0122_Burning.md

community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community of the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

The aim of this Request for Comment (RFC) is to describe the process of Burning UTXOs and to track the amount burned. 

## Related Requests for Comment

* [RFC-0100: Base Layer](RFC-0100_BaseLayer.md)
* [RFC-0120: Consensus](RFC-0120_Consensus.md)

## Description

Blockchains have used the burn method to destroy coins in circulation and block their use forever. Most chains use a reclaimable address
to denote burned coins. Using [RFC-0201: TariScript](RFC-0201_TariScript.md), Tari can also use this method, but this does not explicitly
remove the coins from circulation. This RFC details a method to remove coins from circulation permanently.

An excellent example of using burned coins is for a [Perpetual One-way Peg](https://medium.com/@RubenSomsen/21-million-bitcoins-to-rule-all-sidechains-the-perpetual-one-way-peg-96cb2f8ac302) this allows users 
create utility tokens on a sidechain or in Tari's case the Dan. By not allowing funds to be moved back, the sidechain gets a total utilitarian value

> . All value speculation will be removed as the sidechain will only ever be as valuable as the main coin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Value speculation is largely removed as the sidechain will only ever be as valuable as value of coins burnet in the peg.
```

For each burned output, we need to have a kernel where the burned output's commitment is stored. 

```rust,ignore
pub struct TransactionKernel {
    pub version: TransactionKernelVersion,
    /// Options for a kernel's structure or use
    pub features: KernelFeatures,
    /// Fee originally included in the transaction this proof is for.
    pub fee: MicroTari,
    /// This kernel is not valid earlier than lock_height blocks
    /// The max lock_height of all *inputs* to this transaction
    pub lock_height: u64,
    /// Remainder of the sum of all transaction commitments (minus an offset). If the transaction is well-formed,
    /// amounts plus fee will sum to zero, and the excess is hence a valid public key.
    pub excess: Commitment,
    /// An aggregated signature of the metadata in this kernel, signed by the individual excess values and the offset
    /// excess of the sender.
    pub excess_sig: Signature,
    /// This is an optional field that must be set if the transaction contains a burned output.
    pub burn_commitment: Option<Commitment>,

}
```

> Each kernel also has a field called [KernelFeatures](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/2ca06724f0ab7c63eb0b6caab563372f353f4348/base_layer/core/src/transactions/transaction_components/kernel_features.rs#L36) that unique properties of the kernel. These fields need to be expanded to include a burn type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each kernel also has a field called [KernelFeatures](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/2ca06724f0ab7c63eb0b6caab563372f353f4348/base_layer/core/src/transactions/transaction_components/kernel_features.rs#L36) that defines the properties of the kernel. The feature set needs to be expanded to include a burn type.
```

Inside this field, we track every possible type of output. We need to add another type here called `BURNED_KERNEL`. 

```rust,ignore
pub struct KernelFeatures: u8 {
        /// Coinbase transaction
        const COINBASE_KERNEL = 1u8;
        /// Burned output
        const BURNED_KERNEL = 2u8;
    }
```

For each burned output in a transaction, there needs to be a kernel. This means that if a transaction has two burned outputs, it needs at least two kernels. 
This stops a node from publishing an aggregated inflated commitment in the kernel. 

### Consensus rules changes

When a block or transaction is received with a burned output, there:

> * MUST be a kernel containing a commitment matching exactly one and only one output that is flagged as burned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the number of `BURNED` outputs MUST equal the number of `BURNED_KERNEL` kernels exactly,
* the commitment values of each burnt output MUST match the commitment value of each corresponding `BURNED_KERNEL` exactly.
```

### Chain balance equation changes 

> When checking the total chain emission, the following equation must hold:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, when checking the total chain emission, the following equation must hold:
```

$$
\begin{align}
&\sum_i\mathrm{C_{i}} \stackrel{?}{=} E_l \cdot H + \sum_k\mathrm{K_k} + \text{offset}\\\\
& \text{for each unspent output}, i, \\\\
& \text{for each kernel excess}, k \\\\
& \textit{offset }\text{is the total kernel offset} \\\\
& \text{and }E_l\text{ is total emission up to block } l\\\\
\end{align}
\tag{1}
$$

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To include burnt outputs in the balance, we can immediately mark burnt outputs as spent (and thus allow them to be pruned), and introduce the additional requirement of tracking the total sum of all burnt output commitments.

This sum is easily verified by summing all `BURNED_KERNEL` commitments in the blockchain history. These are available to all nodes since the kernels are never pruned.

The balance equation then becomes
```

    /// An standard non-coinbase output.
    Standard = 0,
    /// Output is a coinbase output, must not be spent until maturity.
    Coinbase = 1,
    /// This output is burned and may never be used as a transaction input.
    Burned = 2,
}
```

### Blockheader changes

On the header of each block, we need to add a field for tracking the sum of all burned outputs on that block.

```rust,ignore
pub struct BlockHeader {
    /// Version of the block
    pub version: u16,
    ...
    /// Sum of kernel offsets for all kernels in this block.
    pub total_kernel_offset: BlindingFactor,
    /// Sum of script offsets for all kernels in this block.
    pub total_script_offset: BlindingFactor,
    /// Sum of all burned output commitments in this block.
    pub burned_total: Commitment,
    /// Nonce increment used to mine this block.
    pub nonce: u64,
    /// Proof of work summary
    pub pow: ProofOfWork,
}
```

This field must contain the sum of all the commitments of all outputs in the block marked as spent. 

$$
\begin{align}
burned\_total = \sum_j\mathrm{C_{j}}  \\\\
\text{for burned output}, i, \\\\
\end{align}
\tag{1}
$$

### Block propagation consensus rules changes

> When a block is received, a base node will typically check the following equation to ensure that the emission is correct:

Reviewer 2: Thi Latex doesn't seem to render in Github's markdown, but it might be fine in mdbook

Author: Yeah github does not render correctly

$$
\begin{align}
&\sum_i\mathrm{Cout_{i}} - \sum_j\mathrm{Cin_{j}} + \text{fees} \cdot H - \sum_k\mathrm{K_k} - \text{offset} \stackrel{?}{=}  V_l\cdot H\\\\
& \text{for each output}, i, \\\\
& \text{for each input}, j, \\\\
& \text{for each kernel excess}, k \\\\
& \textit{offset }\text{is the total kernel offset} \\\\
& \text{and }V_l \text{ is the block reward for block } l\\\\
\end{align}
\tag{2}
$$

> This equation need to be modified to allow checking the burned number as well, so we change it to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This equation needs to be modified to allow checking the burned number as well, so we change it to:
```

$$
\begin{align}
&\sum_i\mathrm{Cout_{i}} + \sum_m\mathrm{Cburn_{m}} - \sum_j\mathrm{Cin_{j}} + \text{fees} \cdot H - \sum_k\mathrm{K_k} - \text{offset} \stackrel{?}{=}  V_l\cdot H\\\\
& \text{for each output}, i, \\\\
& \text{for each burned output}, m, \\\\
& \text{for each input}, j, \\\\
& \text{for each kernel excess}, k \\\\
& \textit{offset }\text{is the total kernel offset} \\\\
& \text{and }V_l \text{ is the block reward for block } l\\\\
\end{align}
\tag{3}
$$

We make the following additions to the consensus rules that block propagation must be checked.

When a node receives a block with the node:

> * MUST for each output marked as burned, flag that output as spent immediately upon inserting it as an unspent output. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* MUST for each output marked as burned, flag that output as spent immediately upon inserting it as an output. 
```

[BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) (covering RFC2119 and RFC8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as 
shown here.

## Disclaimer

This document and its content are intended for information purposes only and may be subject to change or update
without notice.

This document may include preliminary concepts that may or may not be in the process of being developed by the Tari
community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community of the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

The aim of this Request for Comment (RFC) is to describe the process of Burning UTXOs and to track the amount burned. 

## Related Requests for Comment

* [RFC-0100: Base Layer](RFC-0100_BaseLayer.md)
* [RFC-0120: Consensus](RFC-0120_Consensus.md)

## Description

Blockchains have used the burn method to destroy coins in circulation and block their use forever. Most chains use a reclaimable address
to denote burned coins. Using [RFC-0201: TariScript](RFC-0201_TariScript.md), Tari can also use this method, but this does not explicitly

> remove the coins from circulation. This RFC details a method to remove coins from circulation permanently.

Reviewer: Add a paragraph explaining the motivation for adding this.(i.e. it serves as a Perpetual 1-way Peg for redeeming utility tokens on the DAN)

A link to [P1wP](https://medium.com/@RubenSomsen/21-million-bitcoins-to-rule-all-sidechains-the-perpetual-one-way-peg-96cb2f8ac302) as precedent would be good context too.

## Introduction

To completely remove coins from circulation, we need to mark outputs as burned, and we need to change the balance equation to
allow pruned nodes and non pruned nodes to still verify the integrity and emission of Tari.

### Transaction output changes

> Currently, each transaction output has a field called [OutputFeatures] that tracks the unique properties of each output. 

Reviewer: Link is broken

Inside this field, we track every possible type of output. We need to add another type here called burned. 

```rust,ignore
pub enum OutputType {
    /// An standard non-coinbase output.
    Standard = 0,
    /// Output is a coinbase output, must not be spent until maturity.
    Coinbase = 1,
    /// This output is burned and may never be used as a transaction input.
    Burned = 2,
}
```

### Blockheader changes

On the header of each block, we need to add a field for tracking the sum of all burned outputs on that block.

```rust,ignore
pub struct BlockHeader {
    /// Version of the block
    pub version: u16,
    ...
    /// Sum of kernel offsets for all kernels in this block.
    pub total_kernel_offset: BlindingFactor,
    /// Sum of script offsets for all kernels in this block.
    pub total_script_offset: BlindingFactor,
    /// Sum of all burned output commitments in this block.

>     pub burned_total: Commitment,

Reviewer: I would actually propose making this the sum of burnt outputs in this block PLUS the value from the previous header (or ZERO if it's the genesis block). i.e. a running total of all BTXOs

Reviewer 2: I don't really have a preference here, so happy to go with that as well

Author: Any reason for this?
I thought about doing it that way but decided against it due to the fact of how we approach and validate blocks in code currently. 
When validating a block, we don't look at overall balance, we only do validation on the block. 
for example:
Is the reward correct for this block,
does this block balance, etc. 
We never do chain balance validation etc, we make the assumption that if the currently stored state is correct we only have to validate the delta and not the entire state again. We do the same with the offsets. This follows that mindset to only validate the delta.

Reviewer 2: We do `parent = prev.hash` and `height = prev.height + 1`, as well as checking MMR roots so I don't think there's much extra work in validating the running total vs total for the block.

Author: Don't get me wrong, it's definitely doable, 
This way just fits in better with the current validation and header checks. 
Hence why I asked if there is specifically a reason why we want to do it this way?

    /// Nonce increment used to mine this block.
    pub nonce: u64,
    /// Proof of work summary
    pub pow: ProofOfWork,
}
```

> This field must contain the sum of all the commitments of all outputs in the block marked as spent. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This field must contain the sum of all the commitments of all outputs in the block marked as BURNt. 
```

$$
\begin{align}
&\sum_i\mathrm{Cout_{i}} - \sum_j\mathrm{Cin_{j}} + \text{fees} \cdot H - \sum_k\mathrm{K_k} - \text{offset} \stackrel{?}{=}  V_l\cdot H\\\\
& \text{for each output}, i, \\\\
& \text{for each input}, j, \\\\
& \text{for each kernel excess}, k \\\\
& \textit{offset }\text{is the total kernel offset} \\\\
& \text{and }V_l \text{ is the block reward for block } l\\\\
\end{align}
\tag{2}
$$

This equation needs to be modified to allow checking the burned number as well, so we change it to:
$$
\begin{align}
&\sum_i\mathrm{Cout_{i}} + \sum_m\mathrm{Cburn_{m}} - \sum_j\mathrm{Cin_{j}} + \text{fees} \cdot H - \sum_k\mathrm{K_k} - \text{offset} \stackrel{?}{=}  V_l\cdot H\\\\
& \text{for each output}, i, \\\\
& \text{for each burned output}, m, \\\\
& \text{for each input}, j, \\\\
& \text{for each kernel excess}, k \\\\
& \textit{offset }\text{is the total kernel offset} \\\\
& \text{and }V_l \text{ is the block reward for block } l\\\\
\end{align}
\tag{3}
$$

We make the following additions to the consensus rules that block propagation must be checked.

When a node receives a block with the node:

> * MUST for each output marked as burned, flag that output as spent immediately upon inserting it as an output. 

Reviewer: This is implicitly taken care of in the overall balance (5). As it's an implementation detail, it's not a MUST do.

Author: This has an effect on the MMR of the outputs. 
If an output is marked as spent, then that reflects on the bitmap of all spent outputs. And this gets committed to in the MMR of the outputs.

\tag{1}
$$

### Creation of burned output

When creating the output, we need to be able to generate a Proof of Burn for the burned output. 
In the header, we already commit to each and every [UTXO] ever created. There already is a proof of the existence

> for this burned output, but this proof is only to the complete output and not just the commitment. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for this burned output, but this proof is only for the complete output and not just the commitment. 
```

> To get around this, we enforce default values for most of the output except the version and commitment field. 

Reviewer 2: I don't like this approach. Feels very hacky

Author: I want us to enforce these rules anyway, regardless of the route we go. I don't think there are any security gaps around allowing scripts etc on the burned outputs, but I don't think we should take that chance. As an additional benefit, this is smaller per output, if all the fields are essentially blank.

Reviewer 2: The space doesn't really make a difference, since these are pruned immediately. I'm not convinced these need to be blank

Reviewer: Surely the only change from the _status quo_ is that we must commit to the BURN flag somewhere in an MMR so it can never be unburnt. This in addition to a consensus rule forbidding BTXOs to be used as inputs, of course.

> And the output, when burned, MUST have the following field values

Reviewer 2: I don't like these requirements. It is limiting because other chains might also want to use this functionality, and they might need a specific metadata, or script

Reviewer: hmm.. for example, if you want to indicate on the second layer which side-chain the burned funds should be redeemed on; or provide a proof of ownership certificate in a script that can be picked up on the 2nd layer.

I think there are several use cases that we'd like to leverage with the metadata and script fields.

Author: mmm, okay, I have been convinced that we should not enforce anything here.

When verifying total chain emission, equation (5) MUST hold.

### Option 2 for Proof of burn

> If we don't want to look into the output MMR, we can include a second MMR root and size counter to the header to track the commitment. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we don't want to look into the output MMR, we can add a second MMR root and size counter to the header to track the commitment. 
```

```rust,ignore
pub struct BlockHeader {
    /// Version of the block
    pub version: u16,
    ...
    /// Sum of kernel offsets for all kernels in this block.
    pub total_kernel_offset: BlindingFactor,
    /// Sum of script offsets for all kernels in this block.
    pub total_script_offset: BlindingFactor,
    /// Sum of all burned output commitments in this block.
    pub burned_total: Commitment,
    /// Merkle root of the burned MMR tree at this block height
    pub burned_mr;
    /// Size of the burned MMR tree at this height. 
    pub burned_mmr_size;
    /// Nonce increment used to mine this block.
    pub nonce: u64,
    /// Proof of work summary
    pub pow: ProofOfWork,
}
```

[burned_mr]: #burned_mr "Burned Merkle root"

This is the Merkle root of the burned outputs.

The kernel_mr MUST conform to the following:

> * Must be transmitted as an array of unsigned 8-bit integers (bytes) in little-endian format.

Reviewer 2: Rather add this info to the other relevant hashing RFC. 

It should also be hashed as a VarInt. 

Transfer doesn't really matter, since it is sent via Protobuf

Author: We should probably update the other consensus rfc then for the other hashes.
